---
title: 'Is Data Science Obsolete in the Age of AI?'
date: 2024-12-11
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---
“Machine age … stuff like that….” Many of us remember this quote from “Push-Button Kitty” episode of our favorite childhood cartoon Tom and Jerry, where Tom’s human asks the cat to leave his job and hence the house as she gets a new mouse catcher, a robotic one. The episode was released in 1952. After more than 70 years, humans in various job roles including data science are on the brink of being replaced by AI after the advent of transformer architecture and subsequent developments. Or are they? Will the rising developments in AI replace data scientists?  The short answer is no.

At minimum, the effective use of AI tools for data science requires human review of data correction. There are instances where data has errors, mismatches, and other problems which require human intervention and judgement. Correcting these errors require human understanding of various data structures. For instance, data from travel agencies may contain some mismatches regarding the location of the hotels. Data scientists use these data to build and deploy recommendation systems which demonstrate nearby hotels for travel destinations. In certain instances, airport codes are not correctly specified, or they are provided in a different format. Imagine planning for a vacation to Cancun, Mexico and checking a recommended hotel nearby your travel destination but later finding out that the hotel is actually located in Saint Peterburg, Russia.  There are countless examples like that.

Human review and correction are specifically critical in checking AI results, ensuring that these results are aligned with the goals. An expert data scientist, who is skilled at data science tools as well as understanding how AI models work, is required to consistently review AI results.  In other situations, contextual information is extremely important. Data scientists in private companies use various historical data to build models. The right use of these data requires contextual information and human judgment.  It is simply not feasible for AI models to consider all data aspects and contexts even with an advanced prompt engineering.

Human review becomes very important when it comes to advanced data analysis and complex tasks. Take network analysis, for instance. To conduct network analysis and plot complex networks, someone who understands network data should be there. Machines usually throw us errors. We need skilled data scientists to understand and evaluate those errors before asking machine how to fix them. Data scientists are needed to formulate the problems and research questions and come up with creative and custom solutions tailored for specific contexts. While there have been fascinating developments in incorporating contexts, “human-level artificial intelligence is going to take a long time”. Generative AI tools tend to hallucinate and there is a long journey to develop hallucination-free AI tools without weakening their other important aspects. Without data science knowledge and skills, the use of generative AI for advanced data science would be misleading and time-consuming, leading users starting in one place and ending up at the same place without real progress.

**Transforming Data Science?**

While AI is less likely to replace human data scientists, it is massively transforming data science sector. One clear way of transformation is automation of tedious and routine tasks such as data cleaning and preparation with human overseeing.   New generative AI tools like Gemini, ChatGPT, and Llama, along with advancements in specialized areas such as computer vision and image or video generation, offer exciting new directions in the field of data science. Rather than replacing humans, these rapid developments necessitate data scientists with new skills in advanced deep learning techniques, understanding and working with generative AI models, and proficiency in using cloud platforms. New developments also require data scientists with excellent communication and interpretation skills as well as domain knowledge.

Going back to the robotic cat, Tom didn’t lose his job after all. The hailed robotic cat with “no feeding, no fussing, and no fur” failed to distinguish between a real mouse and robotic mice and demolished the whole house. Perhaps, it needed its furry version to oversee its operations in catching Jerry. In that case, the robot cat wouldn’t replace Tom but augment his job performance.  While this didn’t happen in Tom and Jerry, an analogous scenario is likely to happen in data science. AI models will need data scientists to oversee its functioning, consistently fine-tune these models, and ensure that they follow ethical considerations and alignment rules.

The bottom line is that new developments in AI are unlikely to replace data scientists but will most likely transform data science sector. Those who develop skills to understand how AI works and integrate AI tools to their daily data science tasks will stay ahead of the rapidly evolving field. The future is uncertain but surely very exciting!
